PART FOURTH
ST. PETERSBURG; FIRST JOURNEY TO WESTERN EUROPE
XIV
    WHEN I joined the Circle of Tchayk車vsky, I found its members hotly 
discussing the direction to be given to their activity. Some were in favor of 
continuing to carry on radical and socialistic propaganda among the educated 
youth; but others thought that the sole aim of this work should be to prepare 
men who would be capable of arousing the great inert laboring masses, and that 
their chief activity ought to be among the peasants and workmen in the towns. In 
all the circles and groups which were formed at that time by the hundred, at St. 
Petersburg and in the provinces, the same discussions went on; and everywhere 
the second programme prevailed over the first.
    If our youth had merely taken to socialism in the abstract, they might have 
felt satisfied with a simple declaration of socialist principles, including as a 
distant aim "the communistic possession of the instruments of production," and 
in the meantime they might have carried on some sort of political agitation. 
Many middle-class socialist politicians in Western Europe and America really 
take this course. But our youth had been drawn to socialism in quite another 
way. They were not theorists about socialism, but had become socialists by 
living no better than the workers live, by making no distinction between "mine 
and thine" in their circles, and by refusing to enjoy for their own satisfaction 
the riches they had inherited from their fathers. They had done with regard to 
capitalism what Tolst車y urges should be done with regard to war, when he calls 
upon the people, instead of criticising war and continuing to wear the military 
uniform, to refuse, each one for himself, to be a soldier and to bear arms. In 
this same way our Russian youth, each one for himself or herself, refused to 
take personal advantage of the revenues of their fathers. It was, of course, 
necessary that they should identify themselves with the people. Thousands and 
thousands of young men and women had already left their houses, and now they 
tried to live in the villages and the industrial towns in all possible 
capacities. This was not an organized movement: it was one of those mass 
movements which occur at certain periods of sudden awakening of human 
conscience. Now that small organized groups were formed ready to try a 
systematic effort for spreading ideas of freedom and revolt in Russia, they were 
forced to carry on that propaganda among the masses of the peasants and of the 
workers in the towns. Various writers have tried to explain this movement "to 
the people" by influences from abroad: "foreign agitators are everywhere," was a 
favorite explanation. It is certainly true that our youth listened to the mighty 
voice of Bak迆nin, and that the agitation of the International Workingmen's 
Association had a fascinating effect upon us. But the movement had a far deeper 
origin: it began before "foreign agitators" had spoken to the Russian youth, and 
even before the International Association had been founded. It was beginning in 
the groups of Karak車zoff in 1866; Turgu谷neff saw it coming, and already in 1859 
faintly indicated it. I did my best to promote that movement in the Circle of 
Tchayk車vsky; but I was only working with the tide which was infinitely more 
powerful than any individual efforts.
    We often spoke, of course, of the necessity of a political agitation against 
our absolute government. We saw already that the mass of the peasants were being 
driven to unavoidable and irremediable ruin by foolish taxation, and by still 
more foolish selling off of their cattle to cover the arrears of taxes. We 
"visionaries" saw coming that complete ruin of a whole population which by this 
time, alas, has been accomplished to an appalling extent in Central Russia, and 
is confessed by the government itself. We knew how, in every direction, Russia 
was being plundered in a most scandalous manner. We knew, and we learned more 
every day, of the lawlessness of the functionaries, and the almost incredible 
bestiality of many among them. We heard continually of friends whose houses were 
raided at night by the police, who disappeared in prisons, and who--we 
ascertained later on--had been transported without judgment to hamlets in some 
remote province of Russia. We felt, therefore, the necessity of a political 
struggle against this terrible power, which was crushing the best intellectual 
forces of the nation. But we saw no possible ground, legal or semi-legal, for 
such a struggle.
    Our elder brothers did not want our socialistic aspirations, and we could 
not part with them. Nay, even if some of us had done so, it would have been of 
no avail. The young generation, as a whole, were treated as "suspects," and the 
elder generation feared to have anything to do with them. Every young man of 
democratic tastes, every young woman following a course of higher education, was 
a suspect in the eyes of the state police, and was denounced by Katk車ff as an 
enemy of the state. Cropped hair and blue spectacles worn by a girl, a Scotch 
plaid worn in winter by a student, instead of an overcoat, which were evidences 
of nihilist simplicity and democracy, were denounced as tokens of "political 
unreliability." If any student's lodging came to be frequently visited by other 
students, it was periodically invaded by the state police and searched. So 
common were the night raids in certain students' lodgings that Kelnitz once 
said, in his mildly humorous way, to the police officer who was searching the 
rooms: "Why should you go through all our books, each time you come to make a 
search? You might as well have a list of them, and then come once a month to see 
if they are all on the shelves; and you might, from time to time, add the titles 
of the new ones." The slightest suspicion of political unreliability was 
sufficient ground upon which to take a young man from a high school, to imprison 
him for several months, and finally to send him to some remote province of the 
Ur芍ls,--"for an undetermined term," as they used to say in their bureaucratic 
slang. Even at the time when the Circle of Tchayk車vsky did nothing but 
distribute books, all of which had been printed with the censor's approval, 
Tchayk車vsky was twice arrested and kept some four or six months in prison; on 
the second occasion at a critical time of his career as a chemist. His 
researches had recently been published in the "Bulletin of the Academy of 
Sciences," and he had come up for his final university examinations. He was 
released at last, because the police could not discover sufficient evidence 
against him to warrant his transportation to the Ur芍ls! "But if we arrest you 
once more," he was told, "we shall send you to Siberia." In fact, it was a 
favorite dream of Alexander II. to have somewhere in the steppes a special town, 
guarded night and day by patrols of Cossacks, where all suspected young people 
could be sent, so as to make of them a city of ten or twenty thousand 
inhabitants. Only the menace which such a city might some day offer prevented 
him from carrying out this truly Asiatic scheme.
    One of our members, an officer, had belonged to a group of young men whose 
ambition was to serve in the provincial Z谷mstvos (district and county councils). 
They regarded work in this direction as a high mission, and prepared themselves 
for it by serious studies of the economical conditions of Central Russia. Many 
young people cherished for a time the same hopes; but all these hopes vanished 
at the first contact with the actual government machinery.
    Having granted a very limited form of self-government to certain provinces 
of Russia, the government immediately directed all its efforts to reducing that 
reform to nothing by depriving it of all its meaning and vitality. The 
provincial "self-government" had to content itself with the mere function of 
state officials who would collect additional local taxes and spend them for the 
local needs of the state. Every attempt of the county councils to take the 
initiative in any improvement--schools, teachers' colleges, sanitary measures, 
agricultural improvements, etc.--was met by the central government with 
suspicion, with hostility,--and denounced by the "Moscow Gazette" as 
"separatism," as the creation of "a state within the state," as rebellion 
against autocracy.
    If any one were to tell the true history, for example, of the teachers' 
college of Tver, or of any similar undertaking of a Z谷mstvo in those years, with 
all the petty persecutions, the prohibitions, the suspensions, and what not with 
which the institution was harassed, no West European, and especially no American 
reader, would believe it. He would throw the book aside, saying, "It cannot be 
true; it is too stupid to be true." And yet it was so. Whole groups of the 
elected representatives of several Z谷mstvos were deprived of their functions, 
ordered to leave their province and their estates, or were simply exiled, for 
having dared to petition the Emperor in the most loyal manner concerning such 
rights as belonged to the Z谷mstvos by law. "The elected members of the 
provincial councils must be simple ministerial functionaries, and obey the 
minister of the interior:" such was the theory of the St. Petersburg government. 
As to the less prominent people,--teachers, doctors, and the like, in the 
service of the local councils,--they were removed and exiled by the state police 
in twenty-four hours, without further ceremony than an order of the omnipotent 
Third Section of the imperial chancery. No longer ago than last year, a lady 
whose husband is a rich landowner and occupies a prominent position in one of 
the Z谷mstvos, and who is herself interested in education, invited eight 
schoolmasters to her birthday party. "Poor men," she said to herself, "they 
never have the opportunity of seeing any one but the peasants." The day after 
the party, the village policeman called at the mansion and insisted upon having 
the names of the eight teachers, in order to report them to the police 
authorities. The lady refused to give the names. "Very well," he replied, "I 
will find them out, nevertheless, and make my report. Teachers must not come 
together, and I am bound to report if they do." The high position of the lady 
sheltered the teachers, in this case; but if they had met in the lodgings of one 
of their own number, they would have received a visit from the state police, and 
half of them would have been dismissed by the ministry of education; and if, 
moreover, an angry word had escaped from one of them during the police raid, he 
or she would have been sent to some province of the Ur芍ls. This is what happens 
to-day, thirty-three years after the opening of the county and district 
councils; but it was far worse in the seventies. What sort of basis for a 
political struggle could such institutions offer?
    When I inherited from my father his Tamb車v estate, I thought very seriously 
for a time of settling on that estate, and devoting my energy to work in the 
local Z谷mstvo. Some peasants and the poorer priests of the neighborhood asked me 
to do so. As for myself, I should have been content with anything I could do, no 
matter how small it might be, if only it would help to raise the intellectual 
level and the well-being of the peasants. But one day, when several of my 
advisers were together, I asked them: "Supposing I were to try to start a 
school, an experimental farm, a cooperative enterprise, and, at the same time, 
also took upon myself the defense of that peasant from our village who has 
lately been wronged,--would the authorities let me do it?" "Never!" was the 
unanimous reply.
    An old gray-haired priest, a man who was held in great esteem in our 
neighborhood, came to me, a few days later, with two influential dissenting 
leaders, and said: "Talk with these two men. If you can manage it, go with them 
and, Bible in hand, preach to the peasants....Well, you know what to 
preach....No police in the world will find you, if they conceal you....There's 
nothing to be done besides; that's what I, an old man, advise you."
    I told them frankly why I could not assume the part of Wiclif. But the old 
man was right. A movement similar to that of the Lollards is rapidly growing now 
amongst the Russian peasants. Such tortures as have been inflicted on the 
peace-loving Dukhob車rs, and such raids upon the peasant dissenters in South 
Russia as were made in 1897, when children were kidnapped so that they might be 
educated in orthodox monasteries, will only give to that movement a force that 
it could not have attained five-and-twenty years ago.
    As the question of agitation for a constitution was continually being raised 
in our discussions, I once proposed to our circle to take it up seriously, and 
to choose an appropriate plan of action. I was always of the opinion that when 
the circle decided anything unanimously, each member ought to put aside his 
personal feeling and give all his strength to the task. "If you decide to 
agitate for a constitution," I said, "this is my plan: I will separate myself 
from you, for appearance' sake, and maintain relations with only one member of 
the circle,--for instance, Tchayk車vsky,--through whom I shall be kept informed 
how you succeed in your work, and can communicate to you in a general way what I 
am doing. My work will be among the courtiers and the higher functionaries. I 
have among them many acquaintances, and know a number of persons who are 
disgusted with the present conditions. I will bring them together and unite 
them, if possible, into a sort of organization; and then, some day, there is 
sure to be an opportunity to direct all these forces toward compelling Alexander 
II. to give Russia a constitution. There certainly will come a time when all 
these people, feeling that they are compromised, will in their own interest take 
a decisive step. If it is necessary, some of us, who have been officers, might 
be very helpful in extending the propaganda amongst the officers in the army; 
but this action must be quite separate from yours, though parallel with it. I 
have seriously thought of it. I know what connections I have and who can be 
trusted, and I believe some of the discontented already look upon me as a 
possible centre for some action of this sort. This course is not the one I 
should take of my own choice; but if you think that it is best, I will give 
myself to it with might and main."
    The circle did not accept that proposal. Knowing one another as well as they 
did, my comrades probably thought that if I went in this direction I should 
cease to be true to myself. For my own personal happiness, for my own personal 
life, I cannot feel too grateful now that my proposal was not accepted. I should 
have gone in a direction which was not the one dictated by my own nature, and I 
should not have found in it the personal happiness which I have found in other 
paths. But when, six or seven years later, the terrorists were engaged in their 
terrible struggle against Alexander II., I regretted that there had not been 
somebody else to do the sort of work I had proposed to do in the higher circles 
at St. Petersburg With some understanding there beforehand, and with the 
ramifications which such an understanding probably would have taken all over the 
empire, the holocausts of victims would not have been made in vain. At any rate, 
the underground work of the executive committee ought by all means to have been 
supported by a parallel agitation at the Winter Palace.
    Over and over again the necessity of a political effort thus came under 
discussion in our little group, with no result. The apathy and the indifference 
of the wealthier classes were hopeless, and the irritation among the persecuted 
youth had not yet been brought to that high pitch which ended, six years later, 
in the struggle of the terrorists under the executive committee. Nay,--and this 
is one of the most tragical ironies of history,--it was the same youth whom 
Alexander II., in his blind fear and fury, ordered to be sent by the hundred to 
hard labor and condemned to slow death in exile; it was the same youth who 
protected him in 1871-78. The very teachings of the socialist circles were such 
as to prevent the repetition of a Karak車zoff attempt on the Tsar's life. 
"Prepare in Russia a great socialist mass movement amongst the workers and the 
peasants," was the watchword in those times. "Don't trouble about the Tsar and 
his counselors. If such a movement begins, if the peasants join in the mass 
movement to claim the land and to abolish the serfdom redemption taxes, the 
imperial power will be the first to seek support in the moneyed classes and the 
landlords and to convoke a Parliament,--just as the peasant insurrection in 
France, in 1789, compelled the royal power to convoke the National Assembly; so 
it will be in Russia."
    But there was more than that. Separate men and groups, seeing that the reign 
of Alexander II. was hopelessly doomed to sink deeper and deeper in reaction, 
and entertaining at the same time vague hopes as to the supposed "liberalism" of 
the heir apparent,--all young heirs to thrones are supposed to be 
liberal,--persistently reverted to the idea that the example of Karak車zoff ought 
to be followed. The organized circles, however, strenuously opposed such an 
idea, and urged their comrades not to resort to that course of action. I may now 
divulge the following fact which has never before been made public. When a young 
man came to St. Petersburg from one of the southern provinces with the firm 
intention of killing Alexander II., and some members of the Tchayk車vsky circle 
learned of his plan, they not only applied all the weight of their arguments to 
dissuade the young man, but, when he would not be dissuaded, they informed him 
that they would keep a watch over him and prevent him by force from making any 
such attempt Knowing well how loosely guarded the Winter Palace was at that 
time, I can positively say that they saved the life of Alexander II. So firmly 
were the youth opposed at that time to the war in which later, when the cup of 
their sufferings was filled to overflowing, they took part.